---
layout: post
title:  "Ask for help in finding the path, not unlocking the gate"
categories: articles
---

In this post: 

- Folks delay asking for help until they encounter a clear, discrete "blocker" 
- Three types of important challenges exist where, by the time you find yourself blocked, you've already missed the opportunity to influence them 
-- binding decisions with unclear implications 
-- advance decisions which need to be made well before reaching a blocking gate 
-- hidden decision points with delayed consequences
- Which means first-timers are typically caught off guard and their advisors are unable to actually help 
- Therefore, you ought to ask for help not only in overcoming a clear obstacle but in navigating the open terrain 

People get embarrassed about asking for help and want to seem impressive when they do. As such, they try to progress as far as possible on their own before asking questions. This is correct in certain common contexts. If you're asking something that you <a title="Please stop doing custdev about stuff you could have googled" href="http://thestartuptoolkit.com/blog/2017/01/please-stop-doing-custdev-about-stuff-you-could-have-googled/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">could have Googled</a>, then you're wasting everyone's time and don't come so across well. But this impulse gets misapplied and backfires when folks are undertaking an ambiguous and difficult journey (like startups). In those cases, the highest-leverage decision isn't about finding the solution to any clear and concrete challenge, but in understanding the landscape and picking the correct path forward (and <a title="Founder-model misfit" href="http://thestartuptoolkit.com/blog/2010/08/founder-model-misfit/" target="_blank">for them</a>). People almost never ask for help at this stage. Instead, they just pick the most visible and well-trod path, put their head down, and start jogging along until they hit a well-defined and impassable obstacle. In the startup world, the well-trod path is VC-backed hypergrowth, and the first clear obstacle is usually fundraising (and sometimes early sales, hiring, or technical hiccups). At this point, unable to keep moving, they finally ask for help. But at this point, they're already committed to the path that they blindly started on. And so what they're asking about is not the strategic question of which path to follow and how to navigate it, but the tactical question of how to get through the gate they've found in their way. This is a huge mistake and they're already screwed due to <a title="Mistakes you’ve already made" href="http://thestartuptoolkit.com/blog/2010/09/mistakes-youve-already-made/" target="_blank">mistakes they've already made</a>.
<blockquote>"When you have to go to the bathroom, it's too late to build a latrine." —Chagdud Rinpoche</blockquote>
There's a rule of self-defense to <a href="http://www.oprah.com/oprahs-lifeclass/never-go-to-the-second-location-video" target="_blank">never go to the second location</a>. The idea is that if you're being held at gunpoint and the attacker tells you to get inside a car or building, then you should categorically refuse to move, and should choose to die on your feet right then if necessary, because that's the moment where you have the most leverage to influence your future outcome[1]. But from the perspective of someone being mugged for the first time, it seems unwise to defy (and potentially fight) the dude with the gun, so they'll typically take the comfortable step forward without even noticing the passage of this critical decision-point. (If the attacker just wants your stuff, on the other hand, then you should just happily give it to them.) This applies to a bunch of situations in startups. If you want to be closing a sale today, then you need to have gathered the performance data and put together the case studies three months ago. If you want to be convincing investors to give you their money today, then you need to have picked a certain type of market and business model 12 months ago. And you then need to have spent the intervening time working uphill to gather the right sort of data. By the time you're standing at that gate and have become aware that you can't seem to get through, then it's already too late for anyone to actually help you. An even more fundamental decision happens yet earlier when first deciding to go the VC-backed hypergrowth route. This is a massively constrained path! It's brilliant fun if it aligns precisely with what you want to build, but <a href="https://medium.com/s/story/reflecting-on-my-failure-to-build-a-billion-dollar-company-b0c31d7db0e7" target="_blank">not so much</a> <a href="https://medium.com/@jimgreer/we-also-failed-to-build-a-billion-dollar-company-b7a2aab742cf" target="_blank">when it doesn't</a>. But of course, if you choose to bootstrap, there are other constraints and hidden decisions (which are too often downplayed by messianic pro-bootstrapping personalities). For example, if you're bootstrapping and aren't already rich, then you're only allowed to pick ideas with positive cashflow, without winner-take-all dynamics, serving customers who you're able to easily access, and building a product which you can start selling long before you run out of money. "But what about my favourite idea? It doesn't fit those criteria, but I want to bootstrap it anyway." Well, fine. That's the easy decision, for now. But you need to realise that it's exactly the same thing as climbing into the car with the dude with the gun. You may not realise what's happening immediately (much like a cow queueing up for the slaughterhouse it can't quite see yet), but you've already killed yourself by getting onto the wrong path. I'm being a bit dramatic because it's a) important and b) non-obvious. You can trudge along the wrong path for <em>years</em> without realizing that your business is already dead. And when you finally do find yourself in front of a gate that you can't get through, and asking for help, and finding that it's just impossible, and fruitlessly asking for help, then your failure won't be because your because "startups are hard" (although they are) or because "the market changed" (although they do). Rather, your failure will be because you didn't ask for help in choosing and navigating the right path. When you pick a path intentionally, and with a solid awareness of the landscape and decision-points ahead, then you'll find yourself up against a series of gates which you're actually equipped and able to pass through. It's frankly quite refreshing. The question, then, is how to get the lay of the land and learn your options when you're making the journey for the first time. The subtler problem is that even if you're traveling on largely the correct road, some gates can only be unlocked due to the (often non-obvious) work you were supposed to have done in the months of the journey leading up to that point. 

<em>Note: The rest of this article is a lengthy example of this blunder that I was a part of last week. It also contains some interesting tidbits for folks interested in either customer development or startup support/education/mentoring. But if that's not of interest and/or you feel that you've already gotten the core point, feel free to stop here. If you'd like to stay on top of future articles, I'd be honored if you could find a spot in your inbox for my newsletter on startups, teaching, and entrepreneurial thinking.</em> 

I had a tragicomic mentoring experience the other day. I'd been asked to talk to some teams about their plan for customer learning. Cool. <a href="https://geni.us/momtest" target="_blank">I know how to do that</a>. One of the teams was helping folks get settled after moving to a new country, especially with regards to avoiding unscrupulous landlords. The main risk is on the consumer side, and they can talk to pretty much anyone who has ever switched to a new city in order to learn the basics of how folks go about researching and choosing their apartments, utilities, etc. Very straightforward. Another was creating tech and infrastructure for smart cities. That's a totally different learning challenge. In some ways, it's a two-sided market (governments + citizens). But it's subtly different because you can't choose a sharp customer segment on the citizen side—you're stuck serving everyone who lives in or visits that part of the city, no matter what. This forces you to abandon 1-on-1 conversations as a tool for learning about the end users, at least until you've built a prototype of some sort.  and instead make your first set of guesses based on preexisting large-scale research and project postmortems, of which there is <a href="https://futurecities.catapult.org.uk/resources/?fwp_document_type=reports" target="_blank">plenty</a>. Once you're caught up with the research, you can start setting up conversations with key decision-makers like the heads of various government departments. But there's another important caveat: normally you can afford to be fairly fast and loose when setting up these early conversations, since the world contains an essentially infinite number of customer in most segments, which means that burning your bridge with any one person is largely irrelevant. Whereas you need to be significantly more conservative when the segment contains a small, finite number of relevant people. In <em>that </em>case, you want to delay approaching these rare jewels of insight (and sales) until after you've learned everything possible from secondary sources (like research reports, postmortems, and industry experts like architects and designers). So my advice to this second team—the smart cities folks—was that there wasn't much to be gained from running customer conversations at this particular moment and that their immediate next step was probably to do a bit of desk research while starting to line up conversations with friendly industry experts. (This is possibly the only time I've given this advice—I'm normally trying to haul folks <em>away </em>from their screens.) The combination of an "everybody" segment on one side and a "finite bridges to burn" on the other meant that rushing into customer conversations would be at best a waste of everyone's time and potentially even actively harmful. As I was giving this suggestion, I started getting significant pushback from the program's organizer who was saying things like, "But if you <em>had to </em>talk to consumers today, how would you go about doing it?" I later learned that the program had essentially forced every team onto the same path and then shoved them along until they hit a gate: customer interview day. Following my session, they were supposed to go grab strangers off the street and run some "high-value" interviews. It would be as if, during the siege of a medieval castle, the attacking king asked his advisors how one would best charge the heavily fortified, unassailable front gate. And they say that with a few weeks' preparation, they could build enough of a siege engine that assault might be viable. And the king says, okay, yes, I can see how that would help, but what if one was going to do it <em>today</em>? And the advisors replied that it would be, you know, utterly pointless suicide for everyone involved, and really shouldn't be their plan A, or any plan really. And then the king replied that yes yes, he understands all that, but if one <em>was</em> going to do it, how would it best be done? So the advisors give some sort of ultimately futile suggestions that, you know, maybe everyone could hold their shields over their heads while running to their deaths? The fact that you can tactically optimise a bad plan does not redeem it of its fundamental badness. (Dear program organisers: if you want to force a path like this, you also need to constrain the teams' ideas so that each team is able to benefit from the path you've chosen. And yes, that means you potentially need to prevent teams from working on the stuff they want to work on—or at least help them re-imagine their core vision in a form which matches your path. A forced path without constrained ideas is an educational clusterfuck. But the problem can go undetected for a long time since you'll receive glowing, five star feedback from the teams whose ideas <em>happened</em> to align with the chosen path. This is the same phenomenon that allows a quack surgeon to get positive feedback from the patients who happened to survive their knife-wielding interventions, and doesn't justify designing a program which predictably and consistently throws everyone else to the wolves. Support a wider range of ideas is certainly possible, but it demands a less rigid program design and an increased reliance on mentoring over workshops.) Back to the smart cities team. Since they were already standing at the gate, they were unable to actually use any of the advice I was giving. And I was unable to actually help them with anything that mattered. So I basically ended up having to tell them to hold their shields over their heads and go waste their time.     [1] Your odds of survival drop precipitously as soon as you allow yourself to be moved. If the attacker would be willing to kill you in a relatively public and noisy standoff, then they would certainly <em>also</em> be willing to kill you in the secondary, more private location. But there's also a segment of attackers who would kill you in private, but who wouldn't risk doing so in a more public and less controlled context. As such, forcing an early confrontation doesn't increase your likelihood of being killed (although it might get you killed slightly sooner, which you could argue is actually a perk in this scenario), whereas it <em>does</em> massively increase your likelihood of staying alive.